imagine yourself standing on a beach
looking out over the ocean waves
crashing against the shore blue as far
as your eyes can see let it really sink
in the sheer scope and size of it all
now ask yourself how big is it how big
is the ocean first thing we need to
understand that there really is only one
ocean consisting of five component
basins that we call the Pacific the
Atlantic the Indian the Arctic and the
southern each of these five while
generally referred to as oceans in and
of themselves are really and truly a
part of a single massive body of water
one ocean which defines the very face of
planet Earth the ocean covers roughly
71% of our planet's surface some 360
million square kilometres in area in
excess of the size of 36 USA's with such
a vast spread when viewed from space the
ocean is by far the dominant feature of
our planet speaking of space the ocean
currently holds over 1.3 billion that's
billion with a B cubic kilometers of
water put another way that's enough
water to immerse the entire United
States under a body of salt water over a
hundred and thirty two kilometers tall a
height well beyond the reach of the
highest clouds and extending deep into
the upper atmosphere with all that
volume the ocean represents 97% of
Earth's total water content on top of
all that the ocean contains upwards of
99 percent of the world's biosphere that
is the spaces and places where life
exists now let that sink in for a second
the immediate world as we know it indeed
the totality of all the living space
encompassed by the continents themselves
all of that represents only 1% of the
biosphere 1% the ocean is everything
else so the ocean is physically massive
its importance to life is practically
unparalleled it also happens to hold the
greatest geological features of our
planet quickly here are four of the most
notable the ocean contains the world's
largest mountain range the mid-ocean
ridge at roughly 65 thousand kilometers
long this underwater range is some 10
times longer than the longest mountain
chain found purely on dry land the Andes
beneath the Denmark Strait exists the
world's largest waterfall this massive
cataract carries roughly 116 times more
water per second over its edge than the
Congo rivers Inga Falls the largest
waterfall by volume on land the world's
tallest mountain is actually found in
the ocean hiding in plain sight while
4200 meters of Hawaii's Mauna Kea sit
above sea level its sides plummet
beneath the waves for another fifty
eight hundred meters from its
snow-covered top to its silt covered
bottom then this Hawaiian Mountain is
roughly ten thousand meters in height
dwarfing tiny Everest paltry peak by
well over a kilometer and since we're
picking on poor Everest let's consider
the world's deepest Canyon the
challenger deep existing 11 kilometers
below the ocean's surface some six times
deeper than the Grand Canyon that's deep
enough to sink Mount Everest into and
still have over 2.1 kilometers of water
sitting atop its newly submerged peak
put another way the depth of the
challenger deep is roughly the same
height that commercial airliners travel
so pretty much however you choose to
slice it the ocean is capital B capital
i capital g big it defines our planet
home to the greatest geological features
comprises the largest living space and
accordingly is home to the greatest
numbers and forms of life on Earth it is
practically incomprehensible in scope
but it is not so big so vast so
extraordinary as to be untouchable
in fact with roughly 50% of the world's
population living within a hundred
kilometers of a coastline and with most
of the remainder living close enough to
lakes rivers or swamps all of which
ultimately lead to the ocean virtually
every single person on the planet has
the opportunity to influence the general
health and nature of the world ocean
evidence of human influence is seen in
every part of the ocean no matter how
deep no matter how distant the ocean
defines our planet but in a very real
sense we define the ocean
you